[Silence ] [Music ]
>> Regina Meredith:
It's been a few months since we
spoke with Andy Hoffman last,
and much has changed
within the economy.
For one, we had a federal
government shutdown which
we're still reverberating from.
Next, we have Obamacare.
No one knows the toll this is
going to take on our economy.
In addition, rumors
have been heightening
for months about
global currency resets
with people putting their lives
on hold waiting for windfalls.
Andy is here to help us
sort through the whole mess
and it is a mess.
>> Andrew Hoffman: It is.
>> Regina: Indeed.
OK, let's see, I have
a couple-- I have
some questions written down.
We can go where we want with it,
but we have to start somewhere.
First of all, let's talk
about the government shutdown.
What happened?
What's still happening?
What's likely to
be happening again?
>> Hoffman: OK, well obviously
what's going on is just a lot
of political posturing.
We did have a government
shutdown per se,
because they didn't fund it.
They need it to pay the bills
so they have to create a new
budget which they still haven't
done,so they've kicked the can
down the road into January
which we'll talk about again.
People believe that
the government actually
was shutdown when in fact
90 percent of the government
was still up and running,
that's why you still
got your mail and all these
other things which have now
been considered essential.
And on top of that, all the
people who were furlowed
got unemployment
insurance, some of them
got unemployment insurance
and now they all got back pay.
>> Regina: Back pay,
I know I heard that.
>> Hoffman: So, they got
basically a two and a half week
vacation.
>> Regina: Talking
about windfalls.
>> Hoffman: Yeah.
A two and a half week vacation
that we paid for and they got
paid overtime for it.
>> Regina: And, yeah, where
did this money appear from?
>> Hoffman: Well, they made a
deal at the last second just
like the fiscal cliff deal last
year to kick the can again.
They didn't really
budget anything.
They said, "OK,
by December 13th,
we will have a long
term spending plan."
They didn't call it a budget.
Remember, we haven't had
a budget for five years.
December 13th is now only
four, five weeks away,
haven't heard a peep about it.
And if they don't
have that, we're
going to go through
the same process
early next year
because this deal
that they made only funded
the government through January
15th.
So, it looks like just like
the fiscal cliff deal last year
and this deal a few
weeks ago, we're
going to go through
the same thing again.
>> Regina: So, if you're
saying that what percentage
of the government of services
were actually still available?
I mean that-- >> Hoffman:
Just about everything.
In fact, the only things
that really close were parks.
They made a big deal
closing the memorial parks
as if you need to close a
memorial park-- >> Regina:
Right.
>> Hoffman: -- and
anger the veterans.
They had a million veteran
march to protest it.
They closed NASA,
you know, things
that really don't matter much.
But again, everyone
got paid anyway,
so it wasn't a real shutdown.
And the bigger issue
that was going on here
was this debt ceiling--
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- which
all was part and parcel.
Remember the fiscal
year ends September 30th
for the government.
So, that's what
this was all about,
the fiscal year they
didn't have a budget
because they never have one.
And also, because of
the deal that they
made earlier this year to kick
the can with the debt ceiling,
they pushed it to the same time.
What they agreed was to
move the debt ceiling again
to "delay it"
until February 7th.
So, again we're just growing
debt at a-- unfettered pace
right now.
But what people don't realize
about what this deal was,
remember you had the
Republicans like Boehner,
that's what I call him.
[Laughter ] >>
Regina: I like that.
>> Hoffman: You know,
acting so tough about debt.
What they inserted
into this deal
is that any future legislation
that attempts to cap the debt
can be vetoed by the
President, but better yet
to override that veto, you
now need a two thirds majority
in both the House and the
Senate which will never happen.
So, essentially, we've gotten
rid of the debt ceiling
permanently and that
will be very clear
when this whole
process goes through
in the next month or two.
>> Regina: I read somewhere
a couple weeks ago.
It was talking about
the rate that which
we're racking up debt
and it was something,
correct me if I'm
wrong, something
appalling like 56,000
dollars a second
or a minute,
something like that.
>> Hoffman: Well, I haven't done
the math in terms of seconds.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: But just last year
alone, it's about a trillion.
This year I should say.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: And you remember
when Obama came into office
and this is not about him,
because as a Ponzi scheme,
it must grow exponentially.
This started back when
we got up the debt --
the gold standard in 1971.
But when Obama came into office,
admittedly during this crisis,
it was 10 trillion
was the national debt.
Now, it's over 17 trillion.
So, we've added over 7
trillion in just five years.
But not only that,
we also nationalized
Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac-- >> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- in
the last five years.
They have 5 trillion
dollars of debt themselves,
but that is now held
"off balance sheet."
>> Regina: So, that's not part
of the total debt package?
>> Hoffman: Yeah,
but it's there.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: And that means we've
added 12 trillion in the last
five years.
And then you have what's called
unfunded liabilities which
means things like the promises
to pensioners, to Medicare,
to Social Security and the
estimates of those which
are rising exponentially
are anywhere from--
I've heard 50 trillion,
a hundred trillion.
I've even seen a
guy named Kotlikoff,
he said it's 220 trillion
and rising rapidly.
So, I mean we've been
broke for a very long time,
but now we're more
broke than ever.
And now that we're
actually getting rid
of the debt ceiling which
is kind of fait accompli,
it was going to happen anyway.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: I mean there's a
good chance that that number
can really go parabolic.
Remember we have all time
low interest rates right now.
And as interest
rates creep up just
by one percent when you
have-- let's say 12 trillion--
I'm sorry, 20 trillion
debt that adds 200 billion
of interest payments
for each 1 percent
that interest rates go up.
>> Regina: OK, so we're now
within a range of unfathomable
numbers, you know, we don't
even or we can't get our minds
around it in general.
We don't understand.
I think how it could have been
allowed for us to get here
to begin with and no one
can really see a way out
of this point.
And so, just to put things in
perspective with the numbers
you just put up.
What is the gross domestic
product of the U.S.
for example?
>> Hoffman: Well, there's a lot
of different numbers out there.
>> Regina: Yeah, yeah, I know.
OK, let's say
something that might
look like a genuine number.
>> Hoffman: Yeah.
Well, for the longest time,
it was around 15 trillion.
So, we're-- you know, that would
make us a 110 percent of GDP
or maybe a 130 percent if
you include the Fannie Mae,
Freddie Mac debt or whatever
number you want to pick.
This summer-- this last
summer, the government secretly
changed their
calculation of GDP and I
think they added-- I don't know
20 or 30 percent to the number
by including intangibles
like goodwill and research
and lost money, and
research ventures
just because they want to
publish that the debt to GDP
number is lower.
But the fact is that doesn't
mask the fact that the debt is
still there and rising.
>> Regina: From
your calculations,
do you think that that's 15
trillion is fair estimate?
Is that a realistic number?
>> Hoffman: It's more realistic
than what they're putting out
there now.
>> Regina: What
they're putting-- Yeah.
>> Hoffman: But again, you know,
the rule of thumb with anything
the government puts out
regarding, well, anything.
But particularly economic data
is that it's pure lies and most
people don't follow
it like I do,
but everyone can see what's
going on with the unemployment
rate which is been particularly
galling 'cause it started right
before last-- the last election
cycle and all of the sudden
the unemployment rates started
plunging-- >> Regina: Yeah--
>> Hoffman: -- because of
the labor participation rate
plunging even faster.
>> Regina: We're going to
get into that in just a sec.
I just have another question on
this whole Ponzi scheme thing.
>> Hoffman: Yes.
>> Regina: Can you give us a
historical example of a Ponzi
scheme that actually lasted a
really long time and worked?
>> Hoffman: No, because
that's the definition.
>> Regina: Because usually
they go bust-- - >> Hoffman:
The definition of Ponzi scheme
is any kind of marketing scheme
or any kind of financial scheme
in which it must grow larger
to survive.
And as it grows larger it
must do so exponentially,
that's why it's a
pyramid-- >> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- that gets larger,
balancing on little point.
So, no, it's impossible.
It cannot, because any pyramid
scheme eventually collapses
either due to the size or
a sudden loss in confidence
and when it comes
to fiat currencies,
fiat meaning on back, there
have been 599 in the history
of mankind and not a
single one has survived.
In fact, the only ones
that didn't collapse
were because they
were-- the nation was
conquered by another nation.
But all the other ones,
including three currencies
in United States itself, every
single one has collapsed.
>> Regina: And as you said, we
talked about this in our last
interview.
Basically, this is a con game,
a confidence game right now.
>> Hoffman: Absolutely.
>> Regina: The entire
economy is a con game.
>> Hoffman: And as the Ponzi
scheme is getting larger,
meaning the debt is getting
larger exponentially,
and as the economy worldwide
is suffering and we're going
to talk about, I saw
the Fragile Five,
the economy is suffering from
the export inflation, you know,
it becomes more visible to the
average person which is why
you're seeing more
market manipulation,
more propaganda and of course
behind the scenes more money
printing.
>> Regina: Let's talk about--
let us go back to unemployment,
some of the unemployment
numbers, the real numbers.
>> Hoffman: Right.
Well, I was mentioning
the labor participation
rate, which generally means--
>> Regina: What does that mean?
>> Hoffman: In generally
means the amount of people
in the potential labor force
that are actually working.
So, what happens with
the government is
if you are unemployed for--
well it used to be 52 weeks,
now they've got up to 99 weeks
the unemployment benefits.
>> Regina: 99?
>> Hoffman: In some places 99
weeks which means why work,
right?
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: Or why try to work.
When you get out-- when
you no longer get benefits,
the government will no
longer consider you a person.
You're not in the denominator
of the unemployment rate.
So, as people--
less and less people
can get a job, less--
more and more people
fall off of that denominator
and therefore, the unemployment
rate looks like it's falling.
But labor participation which
shows the percentage of people
that can work,
that actually are,
has been plummeting
at a record rate.
In fact, we hit a 35 year low.
I would say we hit that
low about a year ago
and each month
it's gotten worse.
Last month was the lowest
it's been since I think,
was it 1980 or something
like that or 1978?
So, the true state
of the economy
is unemployment
is getting worse,
but that's only part of it.
The type of jobs, the quality
of the jobs is plunging,
is weakening because we've
lost all of our manufacturing
capability.
We sold it out to the east,
and part of-- >> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: It would
have gone there anyway,
because they have low cost, but
also because of all the trade
deals that were lobbied for in
the 1980s like GATT and NAFTA--
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- have
accelerated that process.
So, the jobs that we have now
which aren't even keeping up
with the growth
of the population:
waiters, bartenders, a lot
of part time jobs and we're
going to talk about
Obamacare and what
that's going to do--
>> Regina: Yup, we are.
>> Hoffman: -- with
the part time jobs.
Yeah.
>> Regina: So, what is the true
percentage of unemployment look
like?
>> Hoffman: There's a guy named
John Williams and not the Star
Wars composer.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: He has a
website called ShadowStats
and he's been doing alternative.
He's the premier alternative
economic information guy.
So, he's got the
real inflation rate
which has been hovering around
8 or 10 percent for years.
And when it comes
to unemployment
there's three
different measures.
The government gives their
bogus 7 percent or whatever
it is, 7 and a half.
And, you know, the
real rate-- if you
talk about people
who are-- as I put it
who can't pay the bills because
either they're not working
or they're working part time,
or they're not making enough
'cause it's minimum wage.
It's, you know, close to 25
percent-- >> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- which is not
far from the depression era.
>> Regina: 25 percent.
>> Hoffman: Yeah.
>> Regina: Yeah.
That's the number I've heard
bandied about about as well.
>> Hoffman: The underemployment.
>> Regina: Underemployment rate.
>> Hoffman: Yeah.
>> Regina: Yeah, which
is as significant.
I mean, that's the true
state of the economy.
>> Hoffman: Yes.
And when you've had a
fed that's been printing
unfettered money
for 40 years or,
you can go back-- it
started a hundred years ago.
Inflation has been so
bad that that trend only
makes the standard of
living that much worse
which is why we have all
time highs in food stamps
and disability and
entitlements of all kinds.
>> Regina: Yes.
OK, let's talk about federal
reserve tapering or taperings,
a subject of tapering.
What does that mean?
>> Hoffman: Right.
Well, the-- I'm sure everyone
listening has heard the term
quantitative easing.
>> Regina: Yes.
>> Hoffman: It's just a fed
euphemism for printing money.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: Now, the
fed, generally speaking,
does kind of behind the scenes
printing money when it keeps
its fed funds rate at zero which
is where it's been for five
years, where they're--
on daily basis,
they're buying short term
bonds to keep rates down.
But quantitative
easing literally
means printing money and
monetizing well any kind
of securities.
Right now, they're monetizing
treasury bonds and mortgage
backed securities, probably
behind the scenes they're
monetizing stocks
because they have
- the President's working
group in financial markets.
It's their job to do that.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: But
generally speaking,
since 2008 they've been on
an overt quantitative easing
program where they buy these
things every month to keep
rates down.
And unbelievably, they now own a
third of all the treasury bonds
outstanding and a half of all
the mortgage bonds outstanding,
plus they owned
Fannie Mae, so they
originate and own pretty
much every mortgage that's
out there.
>> Regina: And you say they're
also in the stock market
as well now, you think.
>> Hoffman: Oh, I know
they're in the stock market.
But they don't tell you that.
That's not something that
they give numbers for.
But for quantitative
easing, the fed
says we are buying now 85
billion dollars a month,
we are printing and buying
85 billion dollars a month
worth of treasuries
and mortgages
and just last week, they
reiterated that they're
doing it ad infinitum.
And at some point, they're
going to own all of them
and they have to
keep increasing it
because the only other
major owners in the world
are the Chinese and Japanese.
The Japanese have stopped
buying and the Chinese
are now actively selling.
So, when they talk
about tapering,
tapering is just a ruse.
It's been for the last five
years, in fact my piece
that I wrote today is about the
history of all these things.
At one point they called
it the exit strategy.
They said, we saw green
shoots of recovery
and this year it became tapering
which would mean slowing down,
not stopping, slowing down
the pace of printing money
and monetizing bonds But the
fact is they never do it,
because the economy keeps
getting worse and anytime they
even talk about it.
They started this
year in February
talking about it again.
Interest rates jumped
up and immediately
the fed governors came
out and say, no, we're
not going to do this.
>> Regina: Nope, can't do that.
>> Hoffman: And yet they still
said in September, I mean,
the media is saying
it's September.
Well, I think they might do it.
I was out there saying there's
not a chance they'll do it.
>> Regina: No way.
>> Hoffman: And they didn't.
>> Regina: Grind to a hault
the housing market and other
aspects of economy.
They can't do it.
>> Hoffman: The housing market
has rolled over dramatically
just since that dumb comment
that-- >> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: -- Bernanke made.
And all he said was, and
this was in June, he said,
"If the economy improves,
we might taper."
And the economy got worse.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: And now the
government shutdown only made
things worse.
And now, they have another
government shutdown coming up
and now the housing
market's rolling over.
>> Regina: Exactly.
>> Hoffman: Any real economic
data you see out there,
not these diffusion
indices where it says well,
if it goes from 51 to
52, things are better.
Those are just surveys
that don't mean anything.
But if you look at
durable goods orders,
retail sales,
capital expenditures,
consumer confidence,
everything that's real
has been dramatically declining.
>> Regina: What about the--
every time we talk I forget.
I should write it down
beforehand-- the Baltic Index--
>> Hoffman: Dry Index.
>> Regina: -- Dry
Index, Baltic Dry Index.
>> Hoffman: Right.
The Baltic Dry Index
is a strange measure
of shipping because it
combines global shipping.
It combines-- >> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- the prices
of the-- the activity
of the tankers and the
prices of the tankers.
It can be misleading
though because there
was a huge glut when times were
good, five years ago or so,
when the economy was good.
A lot of these
shipping companies
built a huge amount of tankers
and that depressed demand
and prices simply 'cause
there were too many out there.
So, a part of its movement
has to do with-- >> Regina:
It's still correcting
the-- yeah.
>> Hoffman: -- factors that have
nothing to do-- >> Regina: OK,
we'll just move on.
>> Hoffman: But the fact is
it did fall to record levels
in 2008 and it stayed there
until very recently where it
started to move up and
now it's moving down.
But the fact is it's
still way below where
it was five years ago.
>> Regina: And it's a movement
of goods around the planet.
>> Hoffman: Yes.
>> Regina: Across the
ocean-- >> Hoffman: Yes,
and its' way below where
it was five years ago,
even with the recent
little blip higher.
>> Regina: Right.
I know this is a naive
question, but when
you have something that is
just so awful looming here
and you have one player sitting
in the middle of it that
has behaved so
badly, the U.S., I
mean there are some
other countries as well,
but we're in such a significant
position in the global economy,
is there such a thing
as too big to fail?
You talked about all
these other currencies
that have failed
throughout the history?
Can China, can the BRIC
nations, can Europe,
I mean-- >> Hoffman: Well,
they're all going to fail.
The way-- >> Regina: I mean
can the U.S.?-- I'm saying--
>> Hoffman: The United States,
the world ceded the United
States the ability to abuse
the global economy back in 1944
when it created the
Bretton Woods Agreement.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: That gave the United
States the world's reserved
currency.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: It valued
all currencies in terms
of the dollar, but it also
valued the dollar in terms
of gold.
So, there was a semi gold
backing to the world.
The problem was in 1971--
>> Regina: Bye-bye.
>> Hoffman: -- and I
say, Lyndon Johnson.
But again, all presidents
do these things.
But he in particular with the
Vietnam and his great society,
there was so much spending
that we knew we could not
keep spending like this.
So, as soon as he left
office, it hit the fan,
and of course Nixon
he just said, "Well
I'm just going to get rid of
it all together." >> Regina:
Right.
>> Hoffman: The world-- that
was the critical point in time,
because the rest of the
world could have said,
"You've breached this contract,
we're not going to let you."
>> Regina: Because now
we're a fiat currency.
>> Hoffman: Yes.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: But the rest of
the world allowed us to do that
and said, "OK, we'll all be
fiat currencies." >> Regina: So,
that's what I'm asking.
We all somehow agreed
to do this together.
The nations agreed to
allow this to happen.
Can they allow us the
U.S., the dollar, the U.S.
economy to tank as it should?
>> Hoffman: Well,
they have no choice.
I mean it's going
to happen either way
and it's not a
matter-- what they
can do is try to
change their policies,
that's why you've seen so many
trade agreements between China
and all these
countries 'cause they
see the writing on the wall.
But the fact is they have all
have been on the fiat standard
for the last 40 years.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: And they've all
racked up incredible debts
at the same rate.
In fact, more so,
than the United States
because they don't have
the reserve currency.
The don't have the
ability to print as much.
When they print-- even
if it's Europe compared
to United States, let alone
all these other countries,
it has greater ramifications
on their economy, on inflation.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: So, they're in
even worst situation than us,
but the fact is they don't--
the only country that really has
any ability to do anything
about it is China.
>> Regina: Is China, yeah.
>> Hoffman: And they are
doing something about it,
because they know that the
Yuan is going to be the next
reserved currency and it may not
be tomorrow but it will happen.
>> Regina: Does the rest of
the planet understand people,
anyone in the know, anywhere
in the world when it comes
to global economics, understand
that the Yuan or the Renminbi,
the Chinese currency will
be the next-- >> Hoffman:
Anyone who's not in denial.
Anyone who's a
realist like we are
understands that, because
it's just simple math.
The Chinese have been
buying gold hand over fist
for the past few decades.
>> Regina: Tons >> Hoffman:
But particularly the last few
years, it's really incredible.
Last year was a record
for them for buying gold
and this year they're going
to double that amount.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: At least.
>> Hoffman: Because they
know that the only monitory
standards that ever worked, that
do not allow for this inflation
are gold standards.
They also have the
largest manufacturing base
in the world and the largest
currency reserves, which
right now they're actively using
to buy things of real value,
such as gold and
other commodities.
>> Regina: So, what is the--you
touched on it a minute ago
but just to do a
little round up for us.
What is the state of the
global economy at present?
>> Hoffman: I would say it's
the worst that it's been
in our lifetimes
across the board.
I mean, that you know,
they can put out from time
to time numbers that
make things look
like, "Oh this one is
doing a little better,
it's doing a little worse."
I mean I'm seeing things
about they're talking
about the Spanish recovery.
And then, you look
at the numbers
and you go, "Well, their
housing-- their housing
never blipped up at all".
>> Regina: No.
>> Hoffman: It's been free
fall, it just hit a new low.
>> Regina: It's so
low, I mean, people--
people that shouldn't even
buy a motorcycle or saying,
"Oh I'm buying a house on the
coast of Spain." >> Hoffman:
Their bad debt at their bank
just hit an all time high last
month.
Their unemployment-- the
unemployment rate in Europe
is at an all time high.
In fact the
European-- >> Regina:
Approximately what real numbers?
>> Hoffman: 12.2 percent
in their numbers.
>> Regina: Yeah, real numbers.
>> Hoffman: Their numbers, but
who knows what the real number
is in Europe.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: It's a lot higher.
And the European commission
today, this morning,
said we expect 12.2 to
remain through all of 2014
going down to only 11.8 in
2015 and of course they're
always overestimating.
That's how bad things are.
So, when you talk about 2008,
oh 2008, things were so bad.
It was 11 percent of
10 and a half percent.
Now it's 12.2 and think
of how low the debt
levels and money supply levels
were in Europe back then.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: But now-- >>
Regina: Compared to now.
>> Hoffman: But now because
they've manipulated the market
higher with all this printed
money, they say, "Well,
things are better,"
but they're not better.
The people are in poverty
right now and in some places,
France is a perfect example.
They're on the
verge of revolution.
I mean this Hollande guy
came into office-- >> Regina:
Well, they know how to do that.
>> Hoffman: They do.
>> Regina: You know, the French,
I totally admire the French.
They have courage.
When they don't like
it, you know, the kids
start breaking windows.
I'm not advocating this.
I'm saying they do
something about it.
>> Hoffman: What I've read
as the most important,
the scariest number
in the world is what--
they call in Europe the
youth employment rate.
>> Regina: Yes.
>> Hoffman: It is -- I think
they use 30 as the cutoff,
or 35.
>> Regina: Yup.
What's youth employment
rate in France?
>> Hoffman: And the youth
employment rate in Europe,
in the PIIGS as called.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: And that's a
lot of population, is--
it's 40 percent, in Spain and
Greece it's 50 to 60 percent.
And I haven't seen the
exact number for France,
but I assure you
it's pretty high.
It's probably 30 plus percent.
And these people are revolting.
This Hollande guy,
he's been in office
for a year, year and a half.
He comes in-- he's
basically communist.
That's what I called him.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: He's taxing them
so high that the economy is
collapsing.
And now he has the
lowest approval rating
of any French president in
history, matching by the way
Obama's lowest approval rate
since he's gotten into office.
>> Regina: That's dangerous.
I was there many, many
years ago when Mitterrand
was elected and
watched what happened
in the more liberal
Latin quarter,
for example, where
the students were.
I've never seen
anything like it.
I did all but run for cover.
The people were smashing
business windows.
There were fires and
things and-- >> Hoffman:
And we've seen that.
>> Regina: -- it sounds
like we're there --
they're there again.
>> Hoffman: We've seen that
this year around the world.
I mean people again go
back to this Fragile Five.
It simply means the five--
these five currencies--
>> Regina: What are they?
>> Hoffman: India,
Indonesia, Turkey,
Brazil and South Africa.
They account for a quarter
of the world's population.
>> Regina: It's different
than the BRIC countries.
>> Hoffman: Yes.
>> Regina: This is a
different-- >> Hoffman:
This is the Fragile Five.
It's kind of a
take on the PIIGS,
'cause these five currencies
have, on average, fallen
over 30 percent in
the last two years.
And they have a quarter
of the world's population.
So, it's not a surprise that
Greece on the verge of collapse
right now.
They had riots in Turkey, major
riots in Brazil this year,
all about inflation.
And don't forget Egypt,
you know, the Arab Spring.
The Arab Spring is about
the fed exporting inflation.
The reason these
currencies have fallen
30 percent in the last two
years is because two years ago,
pretty much the month
is when the fed started
with QE3-- >> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- which has
been their most aggressive--
combined it with QE4,
what they're doing now.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: Their most
aggressive money printing
to date.
And what happens is that
money--that money here,
it isn't-- doesn't do as much
damage to inflation as it does
around the world.
It just goes out into the global
markets and causes inflation.
And so, you know, that's what's
going on around the world.
And the more that
the fed prints now
and I predict that they're
going to be doing a QE5.
Probably a lot sooner
than people can think,
it's only going to cause a
greater amount of inflation
around the world and
eventually it'll, you know,
I'd say it's like a totem
pole, and we're at the top,
because we're the
reserve currency.
And eventually, the cancer
is going to up the totem
pole and give us the
kind of rampant inflation
that they've seen in India
and Indonesia and Brazil.
>> Regina: India was just on the
verge of becoming a real player
in certain industries,
what's happened with them?
>> Hoffman: The way
I put it with Brazil,
it's kind of like an
apartheid situation,
where you had in South Africa,
you had a small minority
of white people governing
hostilely a large majority
of black people and look
what happened, right?
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: Of course, there was
civil unrest then they kicked
them out.
In India which is
steeped in tradition
as the most gold loving nation
on the planet-- >> Regina: Yes.
>> Hoffman: -- where if you ask
the average Indian, you know,
how do you measure your wealth,
they're not going to say
rupees.
They're going to say real
items of value like gold.
>> Regina: I've seen
women who have nothing.
They're dirt poor, they're
selling cow dung patties to get
by with gold bracelets on 'cause
it was still what they have
left from their dowry. -- Yes.
>> Hoffman: That's their money.
It's more than a third
of all their wealth
is gold whereas in United
States it's probably 1 percent.
>> Regina: So what
does this mean?
>> Hoffman: Well, it means
that the central bankers--
again every central banker
is part of the system,
the fiat system.
And in India they allowed
them to get in power.
And there's some small
minority of people
that are printing money are
fighting a nation of people
who hate it and
want the real thing.
So, you've seen
an utter collapse
of the rupee this
year, huge inflation.
You know, I think that
there's going to be
civil unrest at some point.
In fact, what they just did
a few a month or two ago
and saying that the
government--they see this
happening.
They made a law-- a
policy where they're
going to be buying on
the open market, rice
and selling it to the
800 million people
for like a penny a pound.
So, basically, they've given
themselves an open ended.
They have to buy in
an open ended market
if rice prices go up.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: The nation
will go bankrupt.
And so, it's just a
really insane situation
going on in India.
>> Regina: OK.
I was going to ask a
little more about Thailand
and some other countries.
But I wanted to get on
to the headlines that
are-- that have been
surfacing lately,
that the stock market is
expected to rise over 20,000.
And people are getting really
drunk on this news and people
who have been out of
the market since 2008,
I'm hearing and
noticing, even my father,
"Well I think it's time to
get back in, it's-- looks like
it's perking back up."
What's really happening?
>> Hoffman: Well, the mainstream
media is always going to just
be sheep-like.
Whatever is moving, that's what
they're going to talk about.
And of course they
are, you know,
their ulterior motive is to
cheerlead because they're
all part of this system,
everything is fine,
everything is fine.
And when it comes to stock
market, first of all,
in real terms, the stock
market is down 70 percent
since the turn of the century.
Meaning if you
take out inflation.
Not to mention if you--
the fact that the survivor
bias in the DOW itself,
you get rid of companies
that were collapsing--
>> Regina: Exactly.
>> Hoffman: -- like General
Motors and Citiroup,
Eastman Kodak-- >> Regina: Take
them out of the portfolio there
and you don't record on
them-- >> Hoffman: Yeah,
and it didn't do quite as well.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: But what you--
mainly what you've had is all
this money printing which
essentially goes to the banks.
I mean when the fed
keeps the rates at zero,
that's mean they're buying
bonds from the big banks
that they've saved
and the big banks just
speculate in the market with it.
They haven't been
lending at all.
The lending has been collapsing.
So, they're really
just speculating
in the market, and
then of course,
the government through
its presidential working
group on financial markets,
you know boosts it further.
Retail participation
as you mentioned
has been as low
as it's ever been.
First in 2000 and
2002 market crash,
people lost their shirts.
Back then it was Greenspan.
He lowered rates to nothing,
he sparked a real state bubble.
People got in on
that because that's
what people do at the top.
They went bust again.
And now, this is the
ultimate with all the QE,
they've actually created a new
bubble in the stock market.
But this time it
hasn't been the retail.
It's not like you
know any neighbors who
are making tons of money in
the stock market these days,
'cause they've all
been out of the market.
So, as you said, all of a sudden
the market's been going up
and they're starting
to write about,
"Oh, it's going to go to the
moon," and just the last month
or two, we've started to see
retail participation start
to increase just as
interest rates are starting
to increase as well which is
the debt of the stock market.
It's just typical stuff,
but this time around there's
going to be nothing left because
when we have the next crash,
the fed can't say, "Oh, we're
going to just print money."
The fed is already
bought everything.
>> Regina: And people are
becoming very weary of that
message.
And now there's the type
of anxiety that's going on,
kind of collective anxiety.
I mean I'm speaking
from-- we're in the U.S.,
so I can certainly sense it
and I hear about it around me.
And one can only imagine what
it's like in Greece, Spain,
France, and other countries.
What-- I mean this
anxiety there--
this is reflecting something
of a mass consciousness.
We talked in the beginning about
the con game-- the confidence
game.
When does this anxiety
start showing itself
as a loss of confidence?
>> Hoffman: Well, again,
it's, you know, you have--
the 99 percent as Romney
put it, and the one percent.
And that gap is getting
larger and larger
because these policies
which are really just kick
the can policies
as far as possible
are heavily favoring the rich.
These-- particularly the
bankers and the politicians that
are in charge of the game.
And so, the average person is
having a more difficult time
paying the bills, they're
getting angrier and angrier.
You see it more so
in the other nations.
I'm talking about
the-- >> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- Fragile
Five-- >> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- and more
third world nations,
but you're also starting to see
it in First World nations per
se.
>> Regina: Yes.
>> Hoffman: I mean, Greece
is a perfect example.
I think if they had
a new election today,
I think that New Dawn
Party-- the Nazi Party
would probably get a huge
percentage of the votes.
People are getting
very angry-- and around
the country here in
the United States.
I mean, I just saw today that
now almost every retailer
is going to be open on
all day on Thanksgiving.
K-Mart is opening at
6 AM-- >> Regina: Yes.
>> Hoffman: -- because business
is so bad that they just
don't care.
I mean people have to
work for minimum wage.
They're lucky if they can do it.
These are the kind of
things that are going on.
People are getting mad.
I remember, these food
stamps, and these disability
and these entitlements which
now are given to more than half
of all Americans.
They are dependent on
inflation not getting
worse because--
in fact they just
cut-- that's one of the
few things they cut.
They just cut food
stamps by six percent
in the latest budget thing.
That's pretty much the
only thing they cut.
And so, what you're seeing
now is the standard of living
is going down and
people are getting
more and more upset and angry
except for the one percent
who are getting richer.
And, you know, at
some point it's
going to fester in this
nation as it's been
festering around the world.
>> Regina: So, amidst all of
this, what's the IMF all about?
What are they doing?
And there's something called
Special Drawing Rights.
What does that mean?
>> Hoffman: Well, the IMF is
a very nefarious organization.
It's basically-- I'm not into
this new world order thing
where - but it's
basically leader--
elite leaders of the leading
nations have created this
organization that bullies other
nations about what they should
do with their finances.
They supposedly have their
own reserves and gold
but they really
don't, they really
are just drawing on
gold that other people
own which may or may not exist.
So they're pretty much
a hollow organization
but they have a lot of power
in the things that they say.
When they say-- when
there's a bailout going on
in Greece for instance,
they're at the table
saying, "You have to do
this." >> Regina: Right.
I mean-- >> Hoffman:
It's on-- >> Regina: --
who are these people?
>> Hoffman: Yes.
They're just a
bunch of bureaucrats
that are in high positions.
And then, you know, they
are not a rich organization
but they are powerful
and they're always--
and if you'd see the
decrees that they're doing,
they are constantly
agreeing with anything
that relates to suppression
of the individual for the one
percent.
And, you know, when you talk
about special drawing rights.
That's just a silly thing.
It's-- that isn't--
they're even past it now.
It's one of these things-- well,
instead of the U.S. dollar,
why don't we create a
basket of fiat currencies
to be the world
reserved currency,
but it has the same
problems as a dollar.
It's based on nothing, plus
it has even weaker currencies
than the dollar.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: So the fact is
you're always going to see
the-- as I call them, the powers
that be trying to kick the can
with new schemes whether it's
the, you know, these bailouts,
these bail ins of which the
IMF is very supportive of.
You know, tarp, you name
it-- nationalizations.
They're always there with
their evil hands in the pie.
And as things get
worse, you're going
to see more people like
them making decisions
until eventually
the people revolt.
>> Regina: OK.
Let's talk about
other currencies.
We already talked
about the Fragile Five.
Let's talk about some
that are so fragile,
they were virtually
non existent.
And I referred to this in
the opening of this show
that they're the two most
notable ones that people--
they're boards all
over the world, people
talking about the Iraqi
dinar, the Vietnamese dong,
and other currencies, that there
is a global reset of currencies
that's getting ready
to occur starting
with a few of the most
fragile, beaten up once
and moving upward.
What do you know about that
and how does Basel 3 come in?
How does the Bank of
International Settlements
figure into all of these?
>> Hoffman: Well,
a lot of question.
Well, when a currency
like the Iraqi dinar,
it was so brutally beaten
up because of the war.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: Funny thing is
I believe in recent years,
it's actually gone up against
the dollar which should tell
you how weak-- >>
Regina: That's bad.
>> Hoffman: -- it
is for the dollar.
>> Regina: It was worth like a
portion of a cent-- >> Hoffman:
Yeah.
>> Regina: -- you know.
>> Hoffman: I put out an article
may be two or three months ago
called "The Most Important
Article I've Ever Written"
because I was just looking at
the Fragile Five currencies
to see what was
going on with them.
But then I said, why don't
I look at all of them,
you know, from population
down just to see.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: And it turns
out that with the U.S.--
with the fed printing more money
than it's ever printed before,
the dollar, excuse me, has
gone up against every currency
in the last two years on average
by 20 or 25 percent except
for I think the-- like the
Kenyan-- [Laughter ] --
something.
It was like a couple of
percentage actually down again.
The point is, the dollar-- the
fed has exported this inflation
explosively around the word.
And now they're-- that I believe
they're going to increase
the QE.
It's only going to get worse.
If you talk about
global resets and you
were saying potential
windfalls, there's
going to be no
windfalls for anyone.
I think if you own
physical gold and silver,
you're going to be
insured against that
but it's going to be a very
difficult road between now
and then.
No matter what
happens, any windfalls
are going to be offset
by the social unrest
by the Draconian
government decrees.
Your goal should simply
be to protect your assets
through this transition to a new
global reserve currency which
will be backed by
gold and, you know,
maybe the process
starts next year.
May be it starts in
five years but it's not
going to be generations
from now, that's for sure.
Because, as I said, it's
a Ponzi scheme that's
in its final stages, when
the debt starts-- first,
it goes out arithmetically
then geometrically,
and now it's in the phase where
it's about to go parabolically.
>> Regina: OK.
What about derivatives?
You know, a lot of
the problems here
started with the
notion of derivatives
which most people can't even
explain what a derivative is.
But does that
vehicle-- that-- do you
call it an instrument
to financial product
or instrument?
Should that even exist anymore
if we knew what it was?
>> Hoffman: Well, it's
too late for that.
>> Regina: I mean--
>> Hoffman: Yes.
I mean, it's funny
'cause Warren Buffett,
who I despise more than
anyone in the planet,
he's the chief sell out.
He's one of the few
people who could
have made a
difference especially
given who his father was--
one of the original gold bugs.
You know, he called
derivatives weapons
of mass financial
destruction which
is exactly what they were.
They compounded all
the bad practices
that led to the 2008
crash, and now they
are again, a Ponzi scheme
in that they must be there.
You can't take them out.
They are-- >> Regina: So
they're going to continue on?
>> Hoffman: They are an
integral part of the system,
a cancer that's lurking
under the table, you know,
holding it up but it's
going to eventually,
and metastasize and
destroy the economy.
The fact is that it
all-- that all goes back
to the repeal of the
Glass-Steagall Act.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: We talked
about this last time,
back in 1999 which allowed--
basically allowed the banks
to do whatever they want.
And when they had--
it was at that time
when they were mastering the
financial engineering products
where they can mix
in the computers
into the real
world of economics.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: And they've
latched on and destroyed it.
So everything that
happens in the markets
is compounded by
these derivatives.
And when the markets
eventually crash, you know.
What you saw on 2008, where
the derivatives compounded it,
it will be a lot
worse this time around
because the system
is more fragile
and there's more derivatives.
>> Regina: OK.
Chase, there were headlines
about Chase-- Chase Manhattan,
that they were
limiting the amount
a depositor could withdraw.
>> Hoffman: Right.
>> Regina: What's
the truth on that?
What's really going on?
>> Hoffman: Right.
Well, J.P. Morgan-- when
you say J.P. Morgan,
they are the government.
They-- you know, some
people say, " Well,
what are the banks doing?"
No.
J.P. Morgan has been
the government's bank
for some time.
You could say the same for
other banks like Goldman Sachs,
just look at all of the
appointments around the world
for-- >> Regina: Absolutely.
>> Hoffman: -- leading positions
in governments and central
banks.
But J.P. Morgan is
by far the largest.
And so, what they do
and you see every day
a new scandal with them
and a new settlement,
but they're immune.
They are too big to fail because
the government backs them.
What you're referring
to is just recently
they sent out letters
to-- >> Regina: Yes.
>> Hoffman: -- thousands of
clients saying as of November
13th, or something, you can no
longer send international wires
which is a form of
capital control.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: And believe me,
if J.P. Morgan is doing it,
it's the government
that's behind that.
Now, there's been some question
about that particular instance
because I've seen articles
refuting it, not by J.P Morgan.
They haven't said
one thing but I've
seen business--
Forbes say, "No, it's
really only for
certain small accounts.
They can upgrade
to big accounts,"
but the fact is those
letters didn't say that.
And I haven't seen
anything that refutes that.
So it's still in
question but the fact
is, we at Miles
Franklin, we've been
talking about capital
controls for some time.
There's a-- just look
at the United States,
they have these two rules
that just came out a year
or two ago called FATCA
and FBAR, Foreign Account
Compliance Act and
one is Foreign--
I forgot what the FBAR is.
Basically, they want the
people to report everything
that they have
outside of the country
and they want other banks
and other countries,
other governments to--
>> Regina: To rat on you.
>> Hoffman: -- to conspire.
>> Regina: Yeah.
Exactly.
>> Hoffman: And so, you're
seeing a lot of blowback from
that, but the fact is these
are all capital controls.
And people forget what happened
in 2008, 2009 at-- you know,
when things are
really falling apart.
The banks were not allowing
people to take money out,
they were limiting withdrawals,
they were limiting-- >> Regina:
Like a couple thousand or
something-- it was-- yeah.
>> Hoffman: Yeah.
The government was
also negotiating--
Congress was debating
confiscating IRAs back then
which they will eventually do.
So as things get
worse, you're going
to see capital controls
which by the way
are going on all over the world.
I mean Cyprus is the
perfect example of that.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: But it's been going
around - around the world,
even Argentina right
now, Venezuela.
It's spreading in Latin America.
So you'll see more of that
what's going on at J.P. Morgan?
It's unclear at the
moment but believe me,
where there's
smoke, there's fire.
>> Regina: Let's talk about now,
Obamacare which-- >> Hoffman:
Right.
>> Regina: -- is not
sounding too good.
I'm-- in fact next week, I'll
be doing an interview with an MD
and he started digging into
fine print and is absolutely
appalled at what Obamacare is
going to bring upon our heads.
So what do you say from a
financial point of view?
>> Hoffman: Well, as I said,
more than half of the nation is
now on entitlements, and
as the situation gets worse
for the economy, you're
going to see more of that.
That's why the Democrats are
doing so well in elections
because they promised more.
There's no-- the Republicans
are not doing well
because they have typically
been the rich party
but people aren't rich anymore.
We now have what's called
the Dependency Nation
and what better
way to foster that
than through this Obamacare.
This-- I mean-- all of the other
socialist nations in the world
have it, so why
shouldn't we have it?
It's a perfect way to get votes.
You know, damn the consequences.
Now, to anyone who's
watching this realizes,
I think it's 20,000
pages, 50,000 pages.
The people who voted
on it didn't even
read it and-- >> Regina:
Doctors are having a hard time
even knowing how
to interpret it.
>> Hoffman: Exactly.
And it's a colossal mess
which has a major cost to it.
Even the Government
Accounting Office--
the GAO has said that it's going
to cost hundreds of billions
of dollars, if not trillions,
while Obama is saying it's
going to pay for itself.
No, it's not paying for itself.
There are-- the
amount of direct costs
alone are in a hundreds of
billions, indirect costs
as you talked about,
you know, the doctors
exiting the system, the employee
mandate which they just put off
from January 1st to
January 1st next year
conveniently after
the elections,
is forcing employers to get
rid of full time employees
so that they don't have
to utilize Obamacare.
And that's going
to only contribute
to what we talked about
in the labor participation
rate going forward.
So, the way I see it and
have seen it for some time
is that this is one of the
most destructive pieces
of legislation in U.S. history
and just in the simplest form.
Forget the rationing of medical
costs are going to surge.
I mean what you're
going to see is
if we're going to be the
socialist states of America
which clearly we're
going to be, we're
going to have
socialist tax rates.
So I think everyone should
prepare for a 50 percent
federal tax rate, just
like to have in Europe,
like they have in Canada,
and getting much higher
for wealthier Americans.
>> Regina: I don't think unless
a person is well traveled from
the United States out--
people do not understand what
the quality of life level has
been here compared in living
in almost any other nation.
>> Hoffman: I just read a piece
this week that showed readings
for different countries
for their healthcare.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: And the United
States rated the highest
in the quality of care in the
amount of time that it takes
to get that care, meaning
you get it quicker.
All those things.
So guess what, we're
going to now, get rid
of all that-- >> Regina: Yes.
>> Hoffman: -- and move down to
that standard-- >> Regina: Yes.
>> Hoffman: -- in
other countries.
And as a result, it's
going to cause chaos
when people came to can't
get the care they need.
>> Regina: Well, chaos
is are already occurring
because they're bumping people
off by the thousands a day off
of their current plans.
It's said in the big
bold print, no problem,
you can keep you rcurrent
plan if you wish,
or you can have our Obamacare.
That's a lie.
People are being bumped
off and my understanding
is most of us are going to be
bumped by the time it's over.
>> Hoffman: This is another one
of those things about Obamacare
which no one was aware
about until-- >> Regina:
No one was aware.
>> Hoffman: -- last week.
>> Regina: Last week.
And now, it's like 2 million
have already lost it.
People every day, people
we know-- >> Hoffman: Yeah.
>> Regina: -- are getting
notices that they have been
removed from their
healthcare plan.
And in addition to that,
it's becoming clear
that the deductibles are
going to sky rocket--
go from 6,000 to 13,000 on
some plans-- >> Hoffman: Yes.
>> Regina: -- for example.
>> Hoffman: I mean it's no
different than, you know,
you're on line for a roller
coaster-- >> Regina: Exactly.
>> Hoffman: -- a long line
and you're right in the front
and then they say, "Alright,
you're kicked out of line,
you got to go to the back of
the line-- >> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: --
because, you know,
when you leave your health
insurance plan and then you got
to go back in, you know, it's
the cost-- >> Regina: Oh,
forget it.
>> Hoffman: -- dramatic higher.
Yes.
>> Regina: So, if
you've been bumped now,
nobody's going to
take you back on.
You can't even get into
the computerized system
to sign up for Obamacare
if you wanted to.
That-- it's a disaster just
from a technical point of view.
What's happening when
you have millions
of people now vulnerable?
Does MediCal pick it up-- I
mean just like it always has?
What happens when
there's a problem?
>> Hoffman: Well, again, this
is going to be questions better
for the doctor--
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: -- because I didn't
even understand this whole
concept of this website and
signing up for Obamacare.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: I thought it
was just kind of a mandate--
>> Regina: And
you're a smart guy.
>> Hoffman: And I really
honestly have no idea how it
works-- >> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- other than the
financial aspect which I know
is going to be catastrophic.
>> Regina: So-- yeah.
>> Hoffman: Yeah.
But there'll be many people who
will get free health insurance,
you know, a lot
of illegal aliens
will get health insurance.
You know, people-- >>
Regina: But they're
taken care of anyway.
>> Hoffman: -- people who
have-- >> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: -- no income-- I
mean that's great conceptually.
And that's the saddest thing.
You know, I talked to a
lot of intelligent people,
family members even, and
they'll say, "Well, it's
a great thing because everyone
should have health insurance."
But yes, there's a
lot of things that
should happen in
the world, but you
have to be able to pay for it.
And between the direct and the
indirect costs that Obamacare
is going to cause on Americans,
it's-- A, it's not feasible,
and B, when everyone
sees in the aftermath,
they'll realize that we
should have never done it.
>> Regina: It's
looking that that way.
Well, I wanted-- we're talking
about gold a little while ago.
I'm hopping around a bit
because we have so many topics
to get in in a short time.
We touched on it.
So I want to go back
there for a moment.
So you're talking
about gold has been,
you know, classically,
historically-- gold
backed currencies have
been the only stability
or-- to a backbone
of an economy.
Now, what I'm wondering is
you see the prices of gold
on paper which have been
brutally suppressed and taken
down by whoever
controls these markets.
And at the same time,
you're finding shortages
of physical gold
which would indicate
the prices should be higher.
>> Hoffman: Right.
>> Regina: How do
we deal with that?
How do you navigate through
that world, gold and silver?
>> Hoffman: Well, that would
be my area of expertise.
>> Regina: Yeah.
I know.
That's why I want to ask
you because I know you know.
>> Hoffman: Well,
look, to start,
the reason that
gold and silver--
they're both
monetary currencies--
have been able to support
inflation free monetary systems
is because they're the only
substances throughout history
that have-- that meet all
the definitions of money.
Now, a dollar is
currency in that
it does spend-- you
can buy things with it.
It is fungible meaning you
can make change for it.
All dollar bills are the
same although now, they're
making so many
different hundred dollar
bills with different
hundred dollar bills
with different colors,
even that's changing.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: But the fact is, you
can't even spend a dollar bill
in Canada right
now where there--
where it's almost parody
let alone around the world.
>> Regina: I know.
I was there recently.
>> Hoffman: Yeah.
>> Regina: They don't want them.
>> Hoffman: And more
importantly, it's not scarce.
They are-- you don't-- A, you
don't even know how many are
out there because so much
is printed beyond the scenes
and there's no scarcity because
they could print as much
as they want, and are.
And of course, it's
not a storage of value.
The dollar has lost 98 percent
of its purchasing power
since the fed
started it in 1913.
It will keep going until
it loses all of it.
Gold and silver are--
meet all of those things.
They are a medium of exchange,
they're widely accepted,
they cannot be diluted and
they've been around storing
value for thousands of years.
That's why-- that's
why it works,
but they're very scarce
and very few people
have them and can
afford them even
at currently depressed prices.
Now, as to your question
about the disparity
in the paper and the
physical markets,
there's always been--
physical metals always
cost more than what I call
paper gold and silver, what
you see on your
screen, because there
is a cost of
marketing and refining
and all of those--
>> Regina: Delivery.
>> Hoffman: -- kinds of things.
But the things is those
premiums as we call them,
they can wildly change.
In 2008, when the government
attacked gold and silver
duringthe 2008
crisis because they
didn't want people racing
into it, they-- we--
the whole world ran out.
Every mint ran out and
the premiums on silver
were 100 percent of the
price-- the price said
on your screen, 9 dollars
and if you only sell the ETF,
you lost your shirt.
But if you own the real thing,
we weren't-- you couldn't buy
it for less than 18
dollars an ounce.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: And, you know,
right now even on a, you know,
in quiet marketing additions,
it's a 15 percent difference
for silver and maybe five
or percent or eight percent
for gold.
In fact, in India
right now where
they're trying to
restrict ownership,
we're seeing premiums of over
200 dollars an ounce for gold.
>> Regina: Wow.
OK.
>> Hoffman: So
it's a-- you know,
there's-- we've seen several
shortages this year alone
in silver.
The mint ran out for 14
days back in January.
In April, there was a big
government attack on gold.
And the same thing happened.
The premiums rocketed
higher and they're still
elevated compared to
where they have been.
And, you know, the
next crisis that
comes, what you're
going to see is--
you're going to see a complete
break between the physical
and the paper.
And that's why, you shouldn't
think of it in terms of price.
You think in terms of how many
ounces do you own because when
the-- you know, when
it hits the fan,
either you have it or you don't.
We've ran out before and,
we will run out again.
>> Regina: So what is the supply
and demand right now in terms
of scarcity?
Is it flowing fairly easily?
You said there are
fairly low premiums
on gold, maybe five or six
percent, something like that.
That must mean-- >> Hoffman: In
the United States-- >> Regina:
-- it's flowing?
>> Hoffman: -- it's just
such an incredible dichotomy
because between all the
propaganda and supporting
the DOW and all
this, and, you know,
there's constant talk about
the economy's recovering even
though it's not-- things
have quieted down in my part
of the world, in the
Western Hemisphere.
But if you look in the east,
Chinese physical demand
has-- last year
was a record high
and this year was
more than doubling.
And I was in China
two months ago.
I was in the gold shops.
It's crazy.
I mean here, there might be
five gold shops in each state.
There, there were 10 shops in
a row just in one little space
and they were full
of people buying gold
with huge teams of people
selling it to them.
So it's a big deal.
You're seeing record Indian
silver demand this year despite
the government putting a 15
percent tariff-- >> Regina:
Is that because the-- >>
Hoffman: -- on purchases.
>> Regina: -- the gold is so--
is still too high there with
the 200 percent increase
so-- >> Hoffman: Yeah.
So-- >> Regina: -- so
they're going to silver?
>> Hoffman: -- they're scared
that people are going to run
the currency to nothing so
they're putting these tariffs
on India but there's a huge
black market that's been
emerging.
And the premiums for what
is there are off the charts
right now.
So basically, you look
in the Eastern Hemisphere
and you're seeing
record demand right now,
whereas a lot of the
Western Hemisphere-- >>
Regina: Why does-- I mean
it's a global market.
Why isn't that not impacting
what's happening here?
>> Hoffman: Because as I said,
the fed has been exporting
so much inflation around the
world that those areas are
feeling it more than we are.
>> Regina: I see.
Got you.
>> Hoffman: So those people
are in more fear right now.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: And look,
inflation is terrible here.
We're talking about
Obamacare among other things
but people have been so used to
it like frogs in a pot of this,
you know, five to 10 percent
inflation every year.
They consider it,
you know, normal but,
you know, what you're seeing
in a place like Brazil,
remember I mean, there's
300 million people
in Brazil rioting in the streets
for months this summer because
of inflation.
This is Brazil.
This is not the
middle of Africa.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: So, you know,
people in places like that--
>> Regina: A country that
actually was crawling out was
doing pretty well.
>> Hoffman: It's a BRIC, right?
>> Regina: It's a BRIC.
It had a lot of progressive
industry going on
and biofuels, all
kinds of things.
And they're suffering
to that extent.
>> Hoffman: But again, you
know, we talked about the BRICS.
It's Brazil, Russia, India,
China, and South Africa.
You know, this was almost
like a propaganda scheme
in itself of how this is
where the world is shifting
but the fact is-- >> Regina:
India has dropped out,
it sounds like-- >> Hoffman:
India, South Africa and Brazil
are three of the Fragile Fives.
>> Regina: Exactly.
So what about Russia?
We haven't talked about Russia.
>> Hoffman: Well,
Russia actually,
it's ironic that not only
are they becoming one
of the wealthiest nations in
the world but they're being run
by Vladimir Putin who was around
when the United States won
the Cold War and has quite
the vendetta against us--
>> Regina: I guess-- >>
Hoffman: -- as he should.
>> Regina: Yes.
>> Hoffman: He's one of the
most brilliant businessmen
in the world and because
of all of their resources,
they don't-- >> Regina: Yes.
>> Hoffman: -- have a lot of
population but they have a lot
of resources.
>> Regina: A lot of resources.
>> Hoffman: They've become
extremely wealthy and they have
been acquiring gold like it's
going out of style as well.
And they've been forging
relationships with the Chinese.
So there's a new axis
that's forming in the east
and the Russians are
a major part of it.
And just look at--
just look again
from a geopolitical standpoint.
Look what Russia did
with Syria this year.
I mean we were hell
bent on bombing Syria.
There's no doubt
we were going to.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: Until Putin
pretty much came in and said,
"You guys really
want to do this?"
And he forced Obama and
the West to back down.
I mean this is a major power
shift that's going from
the west to east and Russia's
going to be a major part
of the new -- I don't mean new
world order but I mean when you
have a new world economic
system-- >> Regina: Alliance--
yes.
>> Hoffman: -- with
the currencies,
they're going to be one
of the strong countries.
>> Regina: Interesting.
>> Hoffman: Not one of the best
places to live but certainly
one of the stronger economies.
>> Regina: Yeah.
I wouldn't trade Arizona for
Siberia-- >> Hoffman: Yeah.
>> Regina: -- that's for sure.
OK.
So now, just kind of coming
around to just one more
question about kind
of what's not working.
Are there some-- which -- if
you could wave your magic wand,
foolhardy practices or
financial instruments,
would you just say, we
can't do this anymore.
And actually personally
have some control over
to clean up our own acts.
I mean obviously you can't speak
for the large-- >> Hoffman:
Well, the system is broken
because the banks now own it.
And that was the part of the
whole Glass Steagall breaking.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: The banks became so
rich and powerful that they are
now are, you know, the biggest
lobbyers in the country.
Actually, the only
bigger lobbyer-- lobbyers
are the healthcare
and the military.
>> Regina: I was
going to-- Yeah,
I was going to say has
to be pharmaceutical.
>> Hoffman: Yeah.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: So that's hence
you got Obamacare hence--
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- you know, the
ability for these guys to grow
unfettered and all these wars.
>> Regina: You bet.
>> Hoffman: So, let's see we're
talking about-- >> Regina:
I was going to say anything
that you would say in a private
way-- >> Hoffman: All right.
Right.
Yes.
>> Regina: -- just not indulge
in anymore-- stay away.
>> Hoffman: Yes.
So we're talking about
that financial-- >> Regina:
We're looking at the fixes
now in 2014-- >> Hoffman: Yes.
>> Regina: -- coming up and we
only have about five minutes.
What can we just kind of ax--
we can't control the government,
we control ourselves.
>> Hoffman: Yes.
The financial system
is hopelessly broken
and you will see more and
more of these shoddy practices
but more of them are
behind the scenes right
now for, you know, for
public consumption.
From a personal standpoint,
what you need to do
is to be defensive.
>> Regina: What do we
want to stay away from?
>> Hoffman: I think you want
to stay away from all paper
investments and that
includes paper--
what I call paper PM
investments-- paper,
gold and silver which could mean
miners and ETFs and closed-in
funds.
>> Regina: They're
all over the place.
>> Hoffman: Yeah.
The stock market is
supported by the government
at unsustainable levels.
The bond market is off
the charts as the biggest
bubble in history
and pretty much
any dollar denominated
paper security
you're at themercy of
what the fed is doing,
what the behind the scene
plans are for printing money,
and I think it's very dangerous.
And that's why I
personally, five years ago,
got out of the
system completely.
You know, you don't have to
own 100 percent physical gold
and silver as I do
but-- >> Regina: You
can still own your house,
your land-- >> Hoffman: Yes.
And will.
>> Regina: -- you know.
That's-- >> Hoffman: That's me.
That's my only other
asset-- >> Regina: Exactly.
>> Hoffman:-- because
it's real items of value.
I'm not a believer in
mortgages and debts
if you can get out of them.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: Some people
say, "Well it will be good
if there's inflation, having a
debt,"-- no generally speaking,
debt is a dangerous instrument
and it should be used very
carefully.
I would say just prepare
for the worst case scenario
but, you know, don't
assume it's going to happen
but that means put
yourself in a situation
where you can't lose if
the market's crash again--
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- or stocks crash,
or bonds crash-- >> Regina:
Where you're not--
you're immune from it.
>> Hoffman: Yeah.
And certainly don't hold all of
your money in paper currencies.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: Everyone should own
at least some physical golds.
So-- >> Regina: When
people are hearing
you talk about the Chinese
yuan, renminbi becoming
their reserved currency.
They're saying, "Gee, why
shouldn't I buy some of that?"
>> Hoffman: Well,
first of all, there's
restrictions on the--
it's still not a fully
freely traded currency.
>> Regina: I see.
>> Hoffman: The only way you
can really buy it is this ETFs--
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: -- which
is again-- >> Regina:
Stay away from those.
>> Hoffman: -- part
of the paper system.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: And you
can't really per se,
put your saving in renminbi.
You could probably put
something in it but not much.
>> Regina: Yeah.
>> Hoffman: But yes.
And remember the renminbi,
the yuan is also un backed.
I mean, yes, there's
a lot of gold that's
being built up behind
the scenes-- >> Regina:
But it's not a gold
backed currency?
>> Hoffman: -- that ultimately
will back it, but right now,
it's-- there's not a single gold
backed currency in the world
so it's probably safer in the
big picture but it's not really
investable for Americans.
>> Regina: Right.
So-- >> Hoffman: Yeah.
>> Regina: -- you were talking
awhile ago about how we have
exported our inflation and
we have created this kind
of cancer that's metastasizing
around the planet economically,
globally.
And that's going to climb
up the totem pole eventually
and where the U.S. economy is
at the top of the totem pole.
Is that when we start
looking at something?
We only have two
minutes left so-- is
that when we start
looking at something
that becomes a global
currency, a global economy?
>> Hoffman: Well, look again,
it's a Ponzi scheme that's near
the end stages.
Eventually-- the U.S. is going
to be-- when the U.S. dollar--
people lose confidence
in it, that's
going to be the end of
this current system.
A new system will emerge which
is not dollar centric, which
is not-- and in fact,
the Chinese just
called for a de Americanized
world just a week or two ago.
So the new world-- I'm not
saying the U.S. is going away,
but it's not going to
be a super power anymore
and the dollar-- we have--
our standard of living
is going to fall to
the global average.
And the new system, will be--
it'll be very rocky between now
and when we get
there, but I don't
know what it's
going to look like
only that there will
be a lot of pain
before we get to the new system.
And that's why people
need to prepare.
>> Regina: Yeah.
I mean it seems inevitable.
We are enmeshed now.
All of our countries, our
economies, our resources
are all enmeshed.
And, you know, everyone's--
certainly anyone watching this
does not like the sound
of one world government,
one world currency or anything
like that but in the end,
do you think it's possible that
there is some kind of healthy
sort of reset to-- >>
Hoffman: Absolutely.
>> Regina: -- to create
something where we are
in a position of having
currencies and resources ebb
and flow and flow between
countries so that as you say it
will be a little more of an
even playing field-- >> Hoffman:
Yeah.
That's true.
>> Regina: -- but it could
be-- could it be healthy?
>> Hoffman: The trade barriers
are permanently broken.
It will be a global world.
I mean, yes, in the
meantime you may
have some tariffs and all kinds
of things and protectionism,
but in the big picture, it's
going to be a global economy.
And when you get back to a
real currency, real money,
you're going to see healthy
growth in the global economy,
but we need to get
to that real money.
>> Regina: Right.
>> Hoffman: We need the fiat
currency to destroy itself
first and then we'll move
on to greener pastures.
>> Regina: Creating
something better.
>> Hoffman: Yes.
>> Regina: Andy,
thank you so much.
Let's wait till-- around
April-- >> Hoffman: Sure.
>> Regina: -- of 2014
and see what happens.
>> Hoffman: Right.
>> Regina: OK.
Loads to tiptoe through here.
It seems as though there really
isn't a safe place any longer.
Maybe a little gold, silver, a
little bit of land and a house,
a shack even, and that's why
I wanted to bring Andy back
on board to talk
to us about this
and get a little reality check.
So we will see where we're
at after the first quarter
of next year.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[Music_]